Fakult¨ at f¨ ur Informatik und Mathematik Summer semester 2026
Dr. Armin Gr¨ oßlinger
Exercises for Lecture: Practical Parallel Programming
Project 3 (Simulation)
Problem 1(Physical Simulation)[25+5 Points]
In this project, we will study the motion of bodies under the influence of (Newtonian) gravity caused
by the bodies’ masses. In general, the problem cannot be solved analytically; therefore, simulation is of
practical relevance.
LetnbodiesK 1, . . . ,K nwith the massesm 1, . . . ,m nbe given. Our simulation is 2-dimensional, i.e., every
body is associated with a 2-dimensional position vector⃗xand a 2-dimensional velocity vector⃗v.
The simulation is performed in discrete steps of equal length ∆t. In every steps, the simulation computes
from the position and velocity vectors⃗x(s)
i,⃗v(s)
ithe position and velocity vectors⃗x(s+1)
i,⃗v(s+1)
ifor the
next simulation steps+ 1 (see the formulas below).
In/scratch/ppp2026/3/you can find data for the initial situation (format description below) and a
skeleton for implementation. The user can choose the number of simulation stepsS, the parameter ∆t
and the initial situation (by a file). The final situation of the simulation is saved to a file in the same
format. At the end, the program prints the interaction raten·(n−1)·S
T(whereTis the total time of
the simulation), i.e., the average number of interactions per time unit. The total momentumPn
i=1mi⃗vi
should remain approximately constant during the simulation (more precisely, the relative change should
be close to 0).
(a) Implement (inparallel.c) then-body simulation with OpenMP parallelism. [4 Points]
(b) Add MPI parallelism to your implementation. [10 Points]
(c) Use Newton’s third law [4 Points]
mi·⃗ai,j=−m j·⃗aj,i
to reduce the number of local computations in each MPI process. In other words: change the
OpenMP part of your implementation to save almost half of the computations that affect “local”
bodies only.
(d) Use Newton’s third law globally, i.e., also between MPI processes to save almost half of the compu-
tations over all bodies. [6 Points]
(e) Add the functionality to save images with the current positions of the bodies (as PBM or PGM
images) everydsimulation steps (with user-specifiedd). This way, small animations can be created
(use, e.g., the commandanimateto play the animations). [1 Point]
(f) (Only for Master:) [5 Points]
To accelerate the simulation further (trading precision for speed), one can replace bodiesK 1, . . . ,K l
that are close together by a surrogate body which has a mass equal to the sum of the masses of the
individual bodiesM=Pl
i=1miand is located at the center of gravity
1
MlX
i=1mi⃗xi
of the individual bodies. When computing the gravitational influence on far away bodies, one uses
the surrogate body instead of the individual bodies.
Arrange the MPI processes in a two-dimensional grid withp xandp yprocesses in the x- and y-
dimensions. The main program computesp xandp ysuch thatp x·pyequals the total numberpof
MPI processes andp y≤p x(cf. memberspxandpyin theTaskInputstructure).
To group the bodies in groups, sort the bodies by theirx-coordinates and formp x(equally-sized)
partitions according to thex-coordinate. In each partition, sort the bodies by theiry-coordinate and
formp ysub-partitions. (In total, this yieldsp x·pysub-partitions.) Every sub-partition is assigned
to an MPI process and each process computes a surrogate body for “its” bodies and communicates
the center of mass and the total mass to the other processes.
In the acceleration computations, the usual computations (including Newton’s third law) are per-
formed locally (within each MPI process); globally (between MPI processes), the surrogate bodies
are used to compute the influence on each local body. (Newton’s third law is not used non-locally.)
Note: due to the approximation, the momentum can differ greatly and the motion of the bodies may
become unphysical.
Uselong double(96 bits) in the computations; the corresponding MPI datatype isMPI LONG DOUBLE. Do
not modify theidfield in thebodystrutures, it is used to write the bodies to the output file in the same
order as the input file.
Upload your solution (fileparallel.conly) in ILIAS. Do not miss the deadline! Late submissions cannot
be accepted due to legal regulations! Work on PPP projects is strictly one person (no teams)! Use of AI
to produce or analyze code is not allowed!
Data format:
The initial and final configurations of the system is stored in a file with the following format. In the first
row, the number of bodies is given. This is followed by one line per body which consists of 5 numbers:
the mass (inkg), thex- andy-positions (inm), the velocity inx- andy-directions (inm
s). Single-line
comments are introduced by#. Example:
2
1.98e30 0 0 0 0 # sun
5.977e24 1.496e11 0 0 29716 # earth
Use this example (in filesun earth.dat) to test the (sequential) implementation. The earth should
(almost) go around the sun in about 366 steps of 86400 seconds (= 1 day). Due to the imperfections in
the simulation, the orbit increases with every revolution.
Suitable parameters for the simulation (number of steps, duration of one step, image parameters) can be
found as comments in the simulation files.
Mechanics:
According to Newton’s theory of gravity, a bodyK jexercises a gravitational acceleration⃗a(s)
i,jon another
bodyK i(i̸=j) in time steps:
⃗a(s)
i,j=G·mj·(⃗x(s)
j−⃗x(s)
i)
|⃗x(s)
j−⃗x(s)
i|3
The gravitational constantGhas the valueG≈6,674·10−11 m3
kg·s2. The total acceleration⃗a(s)
ion body
Kiis:
⃗a(s)
i=X
1≤j≤n
i̸=j⃗a(s)
i,j
The approximations for the new positions⃗x(s+1)
iand the new velocities⃗v(s+1)
iin the next simulation step
s+ 1 are computed from⃗x(s)
i,⃗v(s)
i,⃗a(s)
i,⃗a(s+1)
iand ∆t:
⃗x(s+1)
i=⃗x(s)
i+⃗v(s)
i·∆t+1
2·⃗a(s)
i·(∆t)2
⃗v(s+1)
i=⃗v(s)
i+1
2(⃗a(s)
i+⃗a(s+1)
i)·∆t
Since⃗v(s+1)
x depends on both⃗a(s)
iand⃗a(s+1)
x, the values for the next simulation steps+ 1 are computed
in the following order: first⃗x(s+1)
i, then⃗a(s+1)
iand finally⃗v(s+1)
i.
Submission due: Monday, June 15, 2026 at 18:00 via ILIAS